
Notes

May 22, 2023

    Celestial Coordinates

        RA (right ascension) - positive is CCW, 360 deg == 24 hrs

        Declination - in degrees minutes seconds

    Laser , maser

        Laser means "Light amplification by Stimulated Emmsion of Radiation"

        In lasers, all light has similar wavelengths and the waves travel together
        in phase

        Maser means "Microwave/molecular amplification by stimulated emission of
        radiation", and is a subset of lasers in the microwave or other
        invisible spectrum wavelength range. 

        Despite their name, masers are not limited to microwave range, and can
        exist in other frequencies (radio and IR)

        Laser are specifically in the visible spectrum

        Natural masers are referred to as "superradiant emmision" since they are
        not artificial masers

        There are masers produced by galaxies which are much more powerful than
        masers produced by stars; they are called "megamasers"

        Water masers emit as 22 GHz from a population inversion in which more of
        the molecules are more excited than their natural state than not.

    Questions:

    1) If the light travels at a constant rate, and the universe is expanding
    exponentially, and the light passes through expanding space, then doesn't
    that mean that objects are actually much farther than the light-year
    measurement we can read currently, due to already-traveled space expanding
    behind the traveling light? I would imagine that a correction becomes
    necessary especially for objects that are viewed in the distant past/edge of
    the visible universe. Is the correction to simply let a unit expand at the
    same rate as the universe expands, such that, in the past, a light-year was
    much smaller? 
    
    - there are different models of the universe's distance scales
    as they relate to time, the important thing is to use the same scale when
    doing comparisons

    2) Since time passes more slowly in areas of higher matter density
    (gravity), then the early universe must have had a very slow rate of time
    passage compared to our present; so does that mean that the universe could
    be thought of as much younger than it appears?

    --------
    Important Formulas:
        λ = wavelength
        c = speed of light
        ν = frequency
        E = Energy
        h = planks constant = 6.62607015 × 10^-34 m^2 kg / s
        T = temperature in Kelvin
        F = Energy Flux ... J/m^2/s
        σ = Stephan-Boltzman constant = 5.67E-8 W/m^2/K^4
        I_tot = total intensity = Energy Flux
        
        
        λ = c/ν
        E = h ν

        Light Intensity = energy/(time*area)

 

    Black body - Anything that has a Temperature is a "Black Body". 
    
    color can be determined from λ

    - All objects emit heat radiation, and the intensity of the radiation
    reveals its temperature

    - For black bodies, which have a characteristic shape of radiation, the
    wavelength at which there is the maximum intensity relates to the
    temperature of the black body. Stars are black bodies

    1) Wien's Law - Hotter objects emit radiation with shorter λ and higher ν

        λ_max = .0029 K m / T

    2) Stephan-Boltzmann's law - Hotter objects overall emit more light at all
    frequencies per unit area.
        - Refers to the total energy given off by a black body

        I_tot == F == σ T^4

    When you graph Intensity vs wavelength for a black body such as a star, the
    overall shape of the graph corresponds to the black body model, but there
    are inconsistencies at specific wavelengths which deviate from the model,
    they are called "absorption features".

    When a photon hits an atom with the exact amount of energy needed to raise
    an electron to the next energy state, then the photon will be absorbed and
    the electron will raise to a more-excited energy state.

    Each type of atom has a unique set of energy levels, so gaps in a wavelength
    graph will correspond to the particular atom that absorbed those wavelengths
    of light from the blackbody, leaving a chemical fingerprint of the
    composition of gasses in a star's atmosphere ... or any other matter that
    might be blocking the path of the light.

    -- I assume that we can determine the composition of a gas/dust cloud by
    comparing the absorption signatures of stars visible behind the cloud ...
    any patterns that appear for all stars visible behind the cloud are likely
    signatures of atoms in the cloud?

    -- Downward energy transitions produce a chemical fingerprint of emission
    lines


    Doppler Effect 
    
    Z = Δλ/λ_rest = ( λ_obs - λ_rest )/λ_rest = v/c, where v is
    the relative velocity away from us and c is the speed of light.

May 23, 2023

    Telescope Formulae

        Magnification

            M = ( focal length of objective lens ) / ( focal length of eyepiece lens )

        The larger the collecting area, the more information the telescope gathers

            Area = ( pi/4 ) * D^2

        Angular resolution

            Angular resolution theta is a function of the diameter of the
            telescope and the λ ... The ultimate resolution is determined by the
            interference of light waves within a telescope

        Diffraction-limited angular resolution:

            θ = 2.5E5 λ / D
            λ, D are in meters

            - ideal is small λ and large D
        
            - Atmospheric turbulence can cause distortion and reduce angular
            resolution
        
    Telescope types:
        - refracting - large and long, point up, so not feasible for large telescopes
        - reflecting telescopes use mirrors

    instruments in telescopes:
        Photometers measure intensity Cameras or CCDs (Charged Coupled Devices),
        with filters to choose wavelength Spectrographs split light into the
        wavelength spectrum and measure the intensity at each wavelength

        astronomers also measure intensity vs time

    Idea: circumsolar satellite array: send off satellites which propel
    themselves towards the sun and away from Earth's orbit a small distance, and
    then enter solar orbit. We build up a circumsolar array of satellites which
    function as an orbit-wide telescope, and also enable solar-system-wide
    communications for communicating with mars and beyond when it is on the
    other side of the sun from us. If they orbit faster than us, we will be able
    to fill the array easily with timed release and also service/replace any
    particular satellite as we go by.

    Notes on MEGA-MASERS AND GALAXIES:

         Abstract

            Definitions/terms

                AGN: active galactic nuclei 
                
                Seyfert2 spectral characteristic: sharp spike on the emission graph,
                not much doppler spread whereas seyfert 1 would have both narrow and
                broad emission signatures as well, indicating a mix of high-velocity
                gas and low velocity gas. E.G., our field of view is not blocked by
                dust clouds with Seyfert 1, as the galaxy is viewed top-down,
                whereas the galaxy is viewed from the side for seyfart 2

                LINER spectral characteristic: weak emission characteristics,
                associated with nebulas which have not been ionized as much. 

                Very Long Baseline Interferometry (VLBI) A technique of using
                multiple telescopes around the world to view the same object, then
                combining the result for a world-wide effective telescope diameter.

                level population - the energy level of particles in a gas.

                Inverted level population - abnormally excited level population
                - does not occur when thermal equilibrium is achievable  

            Summary of Abstract:
        
                Masers seem to be produced near new stars. It is assumed that
                masers are produced by fields of gas which is abnormally excited
                (Inverted level population)... which can occur because of the
                low density of cosmic gas preventing thermal equilibrium. Masers
                are formed when the inverted population gas releases its energy
                as light in a specific wavelength of microwave radiation.
                
                MegaMasers come from the active center of galaxies, and are
                assumed to be associated with accretion disks of supermassive
                black holes. The megamasers come from gas that is at relatively
                high density (though still low enough to prevent thermal
                equilibrium) 

                Water megamasers are found within a few lightyears of the center
                of the galaxy, while hydroxyl megamasers come from
                star-formation fields within a few hundred lightyears of the
                center of the galaxy. 

                Water megamasers have seyfert 2 and LINER type spectral
                features, and are associated with spiral and sometimes
                elliptical galaxies (which also suggests central galactic
                black-hole activity?)

                Hydroxyl megamasers are associated with IR galaxies and the
                brightness of the megamaser is proportional to the brightness of
                the galaxy's IR emission.

                VLBI is used to get high-resolution spectral analysis of masers,
                which is possible because of how bright the masers are. The
                resolution is good enough to compare different regions separated
                under 1 parsec.

                Megamasers are also amazing tools for determining the distance
                to the galaxy due to the brightness and high spatial resolution
                possible.

                The purpose of the paper is to give evidence that star-forming
                dust exposed to intense IR galaxy-light typically forms OH
                megamasers. The paper also speculates that during the early
                universe, when IR radiation from young stars was much more
                prevalent, mega maser formation was also more prevalent,
                possibly forming masers of larger orders of magnitude than
                currently observed. If that is the case, then future surveys of
                deep space may reveal such gigamasers from the distant past. 
                That would be very useful for a data point in determining the
                rate of expansion of space.

            Summary of section 1:

                Masers require 3 things:

                1) population inversion (with an energy source) 
                
                2) velocity coherence - the molecules that will produce the
                maser must be moving in about the same direction and at about
                the same speed from our vantage point.

                3) the two above conditions must be met over a significant
                length through the molecule field so as to create an
                amplification of the microwaves.

                There are two types of Pumping mechanisms:

                1) collisional pumping: collisions between molecules create the
                high-energy state. Collisional pumping has an upper bound on the
                intensity of maser that can be produced by increasing the
                density of gas.

                2) radiative pumping: IR photons are absorbed by the molecules

                "The IR spectral energy distribution of dust emission from star
                forming regions typically peaks at 60 μm to 100 μm,
                corresponding to much lower dust temperature, at 30–50 K. This
                suggests that the source of OH maser emission has to be quite
                close to the energy and heating source, and therefore spatially
                relatively confined." pg 632 S1.3

                Masers need gaseous water. Gaseous water is rare except in
                diffuse gas clouds and in star nurseries.
                
                In figure 2, it is noted that all the masers have a small
                velocity spread with their neighbors, and that they are all near
                energy sources.

                Interstellar masers are brighter than masers near stars

                So far, we have looked at masers from The Galaxy.
                Now, we turn to masers from other galaxies.

                Until the 1970's, we did not have the sensitivity to detect
                intergalactic masers. After that, masers were detected from
                galactic sources that were similar to masers from star forming
                regions in our own galaxy.

                Then in 1979, an extragalactic maser 10x as strong as masers from our
                Galaxy was observed.


                Other similar very bright masers were found
                At first it was thought that the high intensity was from many
                masers acting together, but becuase the signal varied in time,
                that was not likely.

                It was proposed that extragalactic masers form in gas around an
                active galactic nucleus, which is on a scale orders of magnitude
                larger than the masers around stars in our galaxy. The energy
                source for extragalactic masers is the galactic core itself.

                That proposal was not accepted until evidence was found in a
                galaxy where it was observed that 



            Questions: 

                1) would a high incidence of microwave masers have an effect on
                water-based planets in the local area? ... since microwaves are
                known to be absorbed by and heat up water.

                2) *why* do astronomers use cm as a common unit of measurement
                of the size of astronomical distances? *why*

                3) Figure 2 shows the positions and velocities of H2o masers. Many
                masers in the same vicinity have similar velocities. Is that an
                example of the velocity coherence mentioned?

                4) On page 634, it refers to "In 1979, unexpectedly strong emission
                (10 Jy) from an edge-on galaxy" ... hold on, I thought that the
                strongest possible masers would be produced by galaxies we saw
                from above the disk, such that dust in the disk did not block
                our view.

        SQL

            Sql (Structured query language) is a programming language to ask a
            database for its records. For SDSS, each record is the information
            of a single observation of a single object in the sky.

            The database is a series of tables. Each table contains one type of
            data. (for example about the spectrum of an object) Each table has a
            series of columns. The column could store position, or magnitude or
            intensity.
            
            ```
                select ra,dec, objTypeName
                from specObj
                where ra BETWEEN 194.25 and 194.75 AND
                dec BETWEEN 2.5 and 2.75 AND
                objType = 0
            ```    

            Schema Browser lets you discover what data is where.
            http://cas.sdss.org/dr7/en/help/browser/browser.asp
            

                






